New Tutorial: Execute a BiaPy workflow in Galaxy using a YAML configuration file (#6621)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/imaging/tutorials/biapy/tutorial.md

---
layout: tutorial_hands_on
title: "Execute a BiaPy workflow in Galaxy using a YAML configuration file"
zenodo_link: https://zenodo.org/records/10973241
level: Intermediate
subtopic: advanced
questions:

> - "How can we make Deep Learning (DL) models accessible to a broader audience ?"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- "How can we make Deep Learning (DL) models accessible to a broader audience?"
```

> - "What is BiaPy and how does it streamline deep learning workflows for bioimage analysis?"

Reviewer: shouldn't this be the first question?

- "How can I execute a BiaPy pipeline directly within the Galaxy platform?"
- "How do I utilize pre-trained models from the BioImage.IO repository to perform inference on image data?"
objectives:
- Learn to configure and run a BiaPy workflow by editing a YAML file to define hardware settings, data paths, and model selection.
- Execute an inference workflow in Galaxy using two different pre-trained models sourced from BioImage.IO.
time_estimation: 2H
key_points:
- BiaPy is an open-source tool designed to lower the technical barriers for using DL in bioimage analysis.
- In Galaxy, BiaPy can run BioImage.IO pre-trained models and provides task-aware pre/post-processing (e.g. instance segmentation decoding) and summary statistics—beyond raw model predictions.
- The BiaPy pipeline can be controlled via a YAML configuration file, which specifies the task type and model source.
contributors:
- rmassei
- danifranco
tags: 
  - Image segmentation
  - Image annotation

>   - Deep learning

Reviewer 2: I suggest to also add these tags:
```suggestion
  - Deep learning
  - Conversion
  - Overlay
  - 3D image
  - Volume rendering
```

---

The application of supervised and unsupervised **Deep Learning (DL)** methods in bioimage analysis have been constantly increasing in biomedical research in the last decades ([Esteva, A. et al.](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41746-020-00376-2)). DL algorithms allow automatically classifying complex biological structures by learning complex patterns and features directly from large-scale imaging data, medical scans, or high-throughput biological datasets ([Franco-Barranco et al., 2025](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41592-025-02699-y)). Furthermore, trained models can be easily
share on online repositories [(BioImage.IO)](https://bioimage.io/#/models) to be reused by other scientists and support open science. 

> However, running DL models often require high-level programming skills which can be often be a barrier to general audience especially the 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, running DL models often requires high-level programming skills which can often be a barrier to general audience especially the 
```

one without a proper computation background. Additionally, many DL models require GPU acceleration, which is not always accessible to all researchers. 

> Such obstacoles might the practical and routine adoption of DL models in bioimaging. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Such obstacles might the practical and routine adoption of DL models in bioimaging. 
```

*So, how to make DL models accessible to a larger audience?* Well, [BiaPy](https://biapyx.github.io/) is an open source library and application that streamlines the use of common deep-learning workflows for a large variety of bioimage analysis tasks, including 2D and 3D semantic segmentation, instance segmentation, object detection, image denoising, single image super-resolution, self-supervised learning (for model pretraining), image classification and image-to-image translation. 

> In this training, you will learn how to execute a BiaPy worflow directly in Galaxy. We learn how to run [inference](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deep_learning) on a set of images using two pre-trained models from BioImage.IO defined in a 

Reviewer: pre-train or pretrain? I found both in the tutorial

> In this training, you will learn how to execute a BiaPy worflow directly in Galaxy. We learn how to run [inference](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deep_learning) on a set of images using two pre-trained models from BioImage.IO defined in a 

Author: I will chnage everything to pre-trained

> BiaPy YAML configuration file. A BiaPy YAML configuration file includes information about the hardware to be used, such as the number of CPUs or GPUs, the specific task or workflow, the model to be used, optional hyperparameters, the optimizer, and the paths for loading and storing data. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BiaPy YAML configuration file. A BiaPy YAML configuration file includes information about the hardware to be used, such as the number of CPUs or GPUs, the specific image analysis task, the model to be used, optional hyperparameters, the optimizer, and the paths for loading and storing data. 
```

![example-yaml.png](../../images/biapy/example-yaml.png "Example of a BiaPy YAML file where the model 'merry-water-buffalo' is defined (red box)")

> For this training we will use two configuration file with two different models from BioImage.IO.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this training we will use two configuration files with two different models from BioImage.IO.
```

Let's start with BiaPy!

> <agenda-title></agenda-title>
>
> In this tutorial, we will deal with:
>
> 1. TOC
> {:toc}
>
{: .agenda}

## Getting test data and the BiaPy YAML configuration file

> The dataset required for this tutorial is available from [Zenodo]({{ page.zenodo_link }}). The CartoCell dataset containts whole epithelial cysts acquired at low resolution with minimal human intervention ([more information]({{ page.zenodo_link }})). The dataset is divided into *test*, *train* and *validation* data each folder containg images and associated masks.

Reviewer 2: Are the masks segmentation masks?
```suggestion
The dataset required for this tutorial is available from [Zenodo]({{ page.zenodo_link }}). The CartoCell dataset containts whole epithelial cysts acquired at low resolution with minimal human intervention ([more information]({{ page.zenodo_link }})). The dataset is divided into *test*, *train* and *validation* data, each folder containing images and associated segmentation masks.
```

> In order to simplify the your upload, we already prepared the test images and YAML files in the **Data Library** which is easy to be accessed on the left pannel in Galaxy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to simplify the upload, we already prepared the test images and YAML files in the **Data Library** that you can access on the left panel in Galaxy.
```

{% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_import_from_data_library.md %}

> After importing from the Data Library, you should have the following files in your history: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After importing the data from the Data Library, you should have the following files in your history: 
```

>
>- *Do you have a configuration file?* : `Yes, I have one and I want to run BiaPy directly`
>
>- *Select a configuration file*: `conf_cartocell_swam.yaml`
>
>- *Select the model checkpoint (if needed)* : Leave it blank. We will load the pretrained model directly from the BioImage Model Zoo, so no checkpoint file is required.
>
>- In the test data section, select the raw images to run predictions on and the ground truth/target images to evaluate those predictions. If no target data is provided, evaluation metrics will not be computed. **Make sure the files are in the same order so each raw image is paired with its corresponding target image**.
>
>     - *Specify the test raw images*: `01_raw_image.tiff` and `02_raw_image.tiff`
>
>     - *Specify the test ground truth/target images*: `01_raw_mask.tiff` and `02_raw_mask.tiff`
>
>- On *Select output* check the boxes:
>     - [x]  `Test predictions (if exist)`
>     - [x]  `Post-processed test predictions (if exist)` 
>     - [x]  `Evaluation metrics (if exist, on test data)`
{: .hands_on}

Once the tool finish its run you will have three different datasets in your history.

> **Test predictions**: Full-size output images produced by the model on the test set. Because the model predicts small, overlapping patches, these patch outputs are merged back together to form one prediction per original image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Test predictions**: Full-size output images produced by the model on the test set. Because the model predicts small, overlapping patches, these patch outputs are merged back together to form one prediction per original image.
```

Reviewer: this is a bit difficult to understand without seeing the image.

> **Post-Processed Test Prediction**: Test predictions after automatic “clean-up” steps defined in the configuration. These steps can refine the raw output (for example, removing small spurious regions or separating touching objects). In this tutorial, Voronoi tessellation is applied to help split instances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Post-processed test prediction**: Test predictions after automatic “clean-up” steps defined in the configuration. These “clean-up” steps can refine the raw output (for example, removing small spurious regions or separating touching objects). In this tutorial, Voronoi tessellation is applied to help split instances.
```

Reviewer: how's Voronoi applied? is it in the YAML file? that'd be good to clarify

>        - *"Z-slice id"* `22`
>    - *"Extract range"*: `All images`
>    - *"Extract crop"*: `Full image`
>    - *"Tile image"*: `No tiling`
>    - *"Pyramid image"*: `No Pyramid`
>
> 6. Rename {% icon galaxy-pencil %} the dataset to `stack_raw_image.tiff`
>
> 7. {% tool [Overlay images](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/imgteam/overlay_images/ip_overlay_images/0.0.4+galaxy4) %} with the following parameters to convert the image to PNG:
>    - *"Type of the overlay"*: `Segmentation contours over image`
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Intensity image"*: `stack_raw_image.tiff` file
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Label map"*: `stack_biapy_prediction_buffalo.tiff` file (output of {% tool [Convert binary image to label map](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/imgteam/binary2labelimage/ip_binary_to_labelimage/0.5+galaxy0) %})
>    - *"Contour thickness"*: `1`
>    - *"Contour color"*: `green`
>    - *"Show labels"*: `no`
>8. Rename {% icon galaxy-pencil %} the dataset to `2D-overlay_biapy_buffalo.tiff`
{: .hands_on}

Results will look like this:

![comparison_2D_buffalo.png](../../images/biapy/comparison_2D_buffalo.png "Segmentation results with the 'merry-water-buffalo' model"){: width="50%"}

> Just by visually inspecting the results, it seems that **'venomous-swan'** model predict more sharp contours and cells, but **'merry-water-buffalo'** seems to capture better the cells with less merges... however segmentation is a bit noiser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just by visually inspecting the results, it seems that **'venomous-swan'** model predict more sharp contours and cells, but **'merry-water-buffalo'** seems to capture better the cells with less merges... however, the segmentation is a bit noiser.
```

It is hard to say that a prediction is better than other by just looking at a slice when working in 3D! 

The **Test metrics** will give us a better overview on which model is performing better!

**'venomous-swam'** struggles mainly with missing objects (low recall)

At IoU ≥ 0.5:

    Precision: 0.328
    Recall: 0.171
    F1: 0.222
    PQ: 0.157

**Water-buffalo** is clearly stronger at instance detection and segmentation

At a commonly used matching threshold (IoU ≥ 0.5), averaged across the 2 test images:

    Precision: 0.761
    Recall: 0.631
    F1: 0.689
    PQ: 0.473

So **Water-buffalo** is better both in:

- Finding objects (higher recall)

> - Keeping predictions correct (higher precision).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- finding objects (higher recall),
- keeping predictions correct (higher precision).
```
